Welcome back everyone to
Exploring Quantum Physics.
Now, were going to complete the solution
of hydrogen atom according to
class mechanics and
this brings in the identification
of non-trivial concept of motion.
This something that was known for many
years by people setting planetary motion,
but emerged as something of great
importance in the development
of quantum mechanics and
I think you'll see that it points one to
directions that are very fruitfully
used when one goes to solving
equation for complex systems,
well we'll see.
Now, just to remind you where we are,
we're still working on,
wer're leading up to the Bohr model of
the atom by solving the classical problem.
So, when you do the homework,
you'll probably be reminded
of some of this material.
Again, I just like to keep in view
that our objective is to understand
real physical systems.
And maybe some of you are tiring
of seeing these spectral lines,
but I never get tired of them.
Okay, here's where we left things
at the end of the last lecture.
We have these two constants in motion,
energy and angular momentum and
that means we know whatever the initial
configurations of the particles are,
they move in a plain that is
determined by the initial orientation.
And then, the motion in that plane is also
restricted to have a constant energy.
So then basically, there's going to
be an orbit in the plane, because you
can't have a continuous,
well at any given point,
there'll be some limits in the motion
that are determined by the energy.
As we shall see.
Okay, now how do we make progress?
Well, we started with these two
first order equations and motion.
Now, we then for the vectors r and p.
Then, we took scalar products,
you might say r is a scalar, r is
the square root in the scalar product.
And we found that there
was a conserved quantity,
the energy that just depended upon the
scalar products of the vectors themselves.
Then, there was a vector
constant of motion
naming them r cross p,
that's also a constant in time.
Well, what other things
do we have to look at.
Well, from the value of angle momentum,
we know that r and p lie in a plane.
So, what other independent vectors do
we have that might lie in the plane.
I think you'll easily see that
these two are cross L and
p cross L both lie in
the same plane as r and p.
So, maybe there's some advantage.
And they're independent variables.
Maybe, there's some advantage to
looking at the equations of motion.
When framed in terms of
these two new factors.
Because after all, since they line
the same plane, it's quite possible
that there's a simpler relationship
between all four of these vectors.
Than is, that meets the eye right now.
Okay, let's see what progress we can make.
So here's let's take our cross L and
look at it in greater depth,
so then we can just say that's,
that's simply that.
R cross P.
Which is then just substituting for
r and r dot takes that form.
Now, were going to invoke
a well known vector
identity to this is the so
called bac-cab rule.
Again, this is going to come up again in
the Quantum Theory of Angular Momentum.
So, it's a good idea for you to at least
be aware that such a thing exists,
and then later on we'll see how you'll
develop a sort of vector calculus
that will help you easily rederive it.
So this is how you,
when you have two cross products,
you can reduce them and simplify them.
And so that gives.
When one goes through the math,
here's this just rewriting that identity.
Then from the bac-cab rule,
you get something that's
proportionate to the position vector and
the velocity vector.
And now, a remarkable thing happens.
When you simplify this and I think it's
really worth your writing notes on this or
freezing the screen,
pausing the screen and taking yourself.
This is a very elementary derivation,
just a sequence of simple steps,
and you see what it gives you is
that R cross L is the time derivative
of the unit vector times r cubed.
Now, what about p cross L?
Let's look at its, let's look at
the time derivative of P cross L.
So that is just, I mean this is an obvious
identity since L dot is zero and
so we now get.
Another cross product for r cross L.
So, in other words, well,
let's just see where that takes us.
So, you see that r cross
L Is equal to r cubed times
unit vector of r dots.
So, this equation implies
that r unit vector dot is equal to
minus r cross L,
divided by r cubed, but
you see that's what we have here.
So, that means that this vector the sum
of p cross L and
the unit vector of r is a constant motion.
This is often called
the Runge Lens vector.
There's a Wikipedia article on this
that's very, very useful, very readable,
very informative but I hope I've
given you a path to rederiving it.
Actually, when you know
that something exists.
When you know that there's something
involving p cross L the results
in the cost of the motion then you
should be able to calculate it again for
this system.
Now, the remarkable thing here we are we
have the energy, we have the [INAUDIBLE],
we have the Runge-Lenz vector.
The remarkable thing is that the,
in some sense, the identification
of the Runge-Lenz vector solves
the problem for us because, look at this.
Let's calculate the scalar product of r.A,
which is r A Cosine phi if.
This is r, and that's A and that's phi.
So, first of all we know that
A lies in the same plane.
As r and p, and so we now know,
so that means that
the location of r is more or
less precisely defined
by the angle phi.
Okay, but now taking r.A just from here,
using this identity,
to r A consign phi is this quantity here.
Now, here is here is one of these
vector identities A dot B cross C.
I hope you recognize what to do with that.
And if you can recall their identity, you
can use it to complete the inline quiz or
you can try computing
that directly yourself.
And in any event,
let's have a look at the quiz.
Okay, so dealing with this
it's A dot B cross c.
There's a cyclic identity.
That's equal to, let's say we move
everything around cyclically.
That's equal to
C.(A x B) = B dot C.
C cross
A.
And so on.
And so in other words,
this term just reduces to
the square of the angular momentum.
And so now, let's see.
I'm sorry for making such a mess here.
Let's try to get rid of it.
It's a very straightforward derivation.
Well, now you see we have a very simple
equation that relates r and phi.
Thusly.
So, here is an equation
that defines the orbit.
It shows r as A rather simple
function of the angle phi.
And that's,
apart from specifying the origin of
time or once you have the values
of these constants to
the motion,
things pretty much fall into place.
So let's see, we've gone on for
quite a while.
So one final calculation
that we'll do here.
We have, this is by the way, an orbit
which can be a circle, an ellipse or
a hyperbole and the distinction between
those depends upon the energies.
There's one last calculation that is worth
doing and that is to calculate A squared.
And I'm going to leave that
to you as an exercise.
It's worth doing because it's a fairly
straight forward calculation and
this is, that calculation gives us
a relationship between the magnitude of
A between the energy and the angle.
So in other words, the energy angle,
the angle momentum, and
the Runge-Lenz vector are each
constants in motion but
as this equation shows they
are not entirely dependent.
Okay forgive me but these is literally
the last of the in line quizzes.
For the moment, and what, what it's
going to be used for is to show you
the significance of
the value of the energy.
In other words for this system,
as we'll see, the energy can be any,
well let's just take the quiz.
So I hope you persuaded
yourself that the energy
of this system can be
absolutely anything from
between minus infinity and infinity.
For example, you can have the momentum
vanish at some given time.
You just have these god like powers for
specifying these conditions.
You can keep p at 0 and then bring
the particles arbitrarily together,
arbitrarily large, negative energy or
you can move to some finite value of r and
then crank up the value of
p to whatever you need.
You can make it as positive as you'd like.
And once you fix the energy,
it stays that way for all time.
And now the critical thing to remember,
this has to do with
some of the readings in the supplementary
material would be in the homework.
Is that there's a point of separation
between positive energies or between
negative energies and positive energies.
So when the energy is less than 0.
All the orbits are elliptical, so
these are like the orbits of
the planets about the sun.
You can get the highly elliptical orbits,
their far distance away.
Those orbits have negative energies,
but they're approaching zero.
For e greater than zero,
you have a type of trajectory
where let's say here's the proton,
the electron comes in and just,
it just visits once and never leaves.
So these two types of classical orbits
actually have counter parts on
the Quantum Mechanical Spectrum.